Today I'm going to do a little bit of
myth busting where where we're going to
look at what cardiovascular exercise or
endurance type exercise does for weight
loss or more to the point that it
doesn't really do weight loss or fat
loss very well.
[Music]
Hi, my name is John Jquish. I am a
doctor of biomedical engineering. I
frequently comment on nutrition,
exercise, sports physiology,
professional athletes, and all sorts of
stuff uh relating to human performance.
Today I'm going to do a little bit of
myth busting
uh where where we're going to look at
what cardiovascular exercise or
endurance type exercise does for weight
loss or more to the point that it
doesn't really do weight loss or fat
loss very well. Oversimplification
is another word for wrong.
So, I want to be thorough enough where
I'm not wrong.
So, I won't just say like cardio sucks
for trying to draw body fat because
that's not entirely true, but there's a
lot of things going on when you give
your body different signals that you
need to be aware of. So way you do
endurance type exercise
uh it's a stress
and your body tends to especially if you
do sustain
what's called like target heart rate. So
you elevate your heart rate and you
sustain that for more than 20 minutes. A
couple things happen is you're reducing
your growth hormone,
suppressing it, and you're increasing
cortisol. Cortisol and growth hormone
tend to be inversely related. So, and
and like if you start to sprint as
opposed to or or do weight training,
growth hormone goes up, cortisol goes
down, except while you're doing the
exercise because any type of stress is
going to slightly elevate cortisol.
Cortisol goes up when you get out of bed
in the morning also. So, I want to also
be clear that cortisol is not like a bad
hormone. There's no such thing as a bad
word, but you want to trigger hormonal
events in the body that are associated
with the type of development that you
want. The problem is you might get
development that you don't want. So, let
me give you an example. when when you're
doing endurance type exercise and and
you see see a lot of women do this where
they'll spend hours on a treadmill and
like over the course of a week like
let's say they're doing half an hour a
day, seven days a week or something like
that. They're chronically upregulating
cortisol to a high level and it stays
there for six or seven hours after you
do endurance type exercise. Well, that
keeps your growth hormone low and we
need to look at what cortisol does. So
cortisol preserves body fat. I really
want that to sink in. Cortisol
when secreted
in a cardiovascular endurance type
training environment, it keeps cortisol
high for extended periods of time. So
like getting out of bed, yeah, your
cortisol goes up, but it goes back down
to 20 minutes. This will keep cortisol
high for six to seven hours. And of
course, if you do your cardio every day,
which most people do because they want
the added effect. They think they're
burning calories. And the problem is
your hormones are changing so that yeah,
you're burning calories, but you're
preserving the body fat. And what you
end up sacrificing is muscle mass. So
you're shrinking muscle and protecting
your body fat when doing these. So you'd
call this type of athlete skinny fat. So
they lost muscle, so they're thinner,
yet they still kept all the body fat. So
like this is why when you look at
marathon runners, they still look sort
of soft, flabby, uh uh a lot of cod
cheese on the thighs. Uh and it's sort
of like, oh, they're athletes. How come
this is happening? Well, you have to
look at how you're engaging the body and
the signals that are being given to the
central nervous system. So when you're
training to be an endurance athlete,
let's just imagine you want to be a
marathon runner. You're giving the body
a set of signals by running marathons or
long long extended runs. Your your
central nervous system is trying to make
you better at that because that's the
signal you're getting. So it wants to
get rid of muscle because it wants to
make you more efficient. So, how do you
go long distances with a relatively
small amount of energy that your body
can process? So, shrinking the energy is
the signal you're giving it. So, getting
rid of muscle. So, you're going to burn
less energy by having a smaller engine.
So, like if you look at an economy car,
they don't they don't put V12s in
economy cars for a reason. So, small
engine, also increased storage of body
fat. If you're going to go great
distances, you want to actually store
more body by fat because that's your
fuel for extended periods of time. Fat
storage goes up. So, I want you to
really see that by doing this type of
exercise, it's not like your body's
sabotaging you. It's doing exactly
what you're showing it it should do
based on your activity. So all of this
is basically going to bring you to a
situation where you're weaker and
fatter.
And there's also negative bone density
implications. So your bone density goes
down, which is meant to sort of shrink
the weight of your frame so that you can
go greater distances. It all makes sense
when you look at the signals you're
giving your central nervous system. This
is all stuff you don't want to do. If
you want to be lean and strong looking,
so instead
give the body the signals to be lean and
strong looking. So when you exercise,
it's got to be high intensity. It's got
to be you want to recruit as much muscle
as possible. You want to put the most
load through the bone mass so that the
bone mass is preserved or even amplified
in strength. That's what my first book
was all about.
So in doing that and considering the
musculature, what do you want? What
signal do you want to give the
musculature? Well, you want to give the
signal that there's not enough
musculature, which is why you always
want to train to momentary muscular
fatigue and you want to compound that
multiple times so that the body say ah
we don't have enough muscle. So so
cortisol is going to go down, growth
hormone is going to go go up. Growth
hormone is not an anabolic hormone by
the way. People are very confused. It is
on that subject. It is an anti-catabolic
hormone though. So that means if you're
eating a little bit less or eating a
little bit less fat, higher protein, so
you're doing like a protein sparing
modified fast. I'll do another video on
that. Okay, at some point. But when
looking at what you're what nutrients
you're giving the body, that whole uh
factors into the same equation. You want
to be giving the body what it needs to
build a massive amount of muscle and
store little to nothing with body fat.
So your body has no mechanism to store
protein as body fat. Never forget that.
So like the amount of protein you can
eat and stay lean is
theoretically limitless. However, in
nature, protein comes with fats, and
fats do cause you to store body fat,
provided you're eating it at a certain
level. So, so, uh, people have followed
me for a while, I I don't like the
calorie argument because counting
calories and looking at calories
imagines that you are a furnace that
burns things, and you're not. You're an
organism. The reason I still am saying
calories is because we don't have a
better system of measurement yet. uh
though professor Barquet who you should
also follow is working on such a
question. Now, when it comes to choosing
the activities that you do to be as lean
and as strong as possible, you really
just need to focus on strength training
and you need to accept the fact that
what your body fat is going to be is so
much more determined by your nutrition
than any type of activity. So, you want
to be anabolic. You want to be
stimulating your musculature as much as
much as possible because the more muscle
mass you have, the more of an engine you
have that's constantly running even
while you're sleeping to get rid of that
excess energy. Now, from the other side,
you want to be giving the body the
things that it can turn into muscle and
not the things that it can turn into
fat. So, you want to have moderate to
low fats. You want to have super low
carbohydrates and you will adapt to low
carbohydrate nutrition. You feel just
experimenting with that and you feel
like you you have low energy. You do
have low energy, but you'll adapt. So,
it takes about 3 weeks to get used to
that. But I just want to make sure that
everybody walks away from this video
with an understanding that expended
steadystate cardio is probably one of
the worst ways
to target body fat and lose body fat. If
this video helped you, I want you to
subscribe and follow. I'm going to put
out videos on a regular basis. I think
they're going to help a whole lot of
people, especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights. We've
got the answer for you.